#LyX 2.4 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 620
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass book
\begin_preamble
% dont number subsections
%sets no indents use \noindent for ad hoc indentation RC
\usepackage{tikz}
\usepackage{pgfplots}
\pgfplotsset{compat=1.18}

\usepackage{lipsum}%% dummy text package

\usepackage{sectsty}% for centering section titles
%\sectionfont{\centering}  % for centering section titles

\parskip=6pt %sets space between paragraphs

\usepackage{dcolumn}
\usepackage{booktabs}%\usepackage{tabulary}

\usepackage[authordate]{biblatex-chicago}
\bibliography{biblio/biblio} 

\graphicspath{{figures/}} % all figures stored in subdirectory
\usepackage[hang,flushmargin]{footmisc}%stops indents on footnotes Must be placed after {biblatex-chicago} to work

\renewcommand{\labelenumi}{(\alph{enumi})} %sets default list to (a) (b) (c)

%=====================================================================
\end_preamble
\options A4
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\language british
\language_package none
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding default
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 1
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\float_placement class
\float_alignment class
\paperfontsize 11
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 0
\use_package cancel 0
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 0
\use_package mathtools 0
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 0
\use_package stmaryrd 0
\use_package undertilde 0
\cite_engine biblatex
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblio_style plain
\biblatex_bibstyle chicago-authordate
\biblatex_citestyle chicago-authordate
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_formatted_ref 0
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\branch Hidden_notes
\selected 0
\filename_suffix 0
\color background background
\end_branch
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 2.5cm
\topmargin 2.5cm
\rightmargin 2.5cm
\bottommargin 2.5cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip halfline
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style british
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tablestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content true
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
A theory of inflation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
A taxonomy of inflation - a return to first principles
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the previous discussions of the the different approaches of macroeconomic policy for economic stabilisation there were implicitly various potentially contradictory explanations for inflation.
 The monetarist explanation implies that it is a purely monetary phenomenon,
 whereas cost push explanations (or supply shocks) might indicate that the roots of inflation are in the structure of the economy (particularly in the Latin American structural tradition,
 which places emphasis on the importance of social and economic structures,
 and the existence of bottlenecks in key sectors
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Need some references here.xxxx
\end_layout

\end_inset

).
 There are also arguments suggesting that inflation is largely a fiscal phenomenon (although such arguments implicitly have a monetary component as well).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
The assumptions of orthodox theories of inflation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Orthodox theories of inflation begin with the assumption that there is a set of relative prices which would constitute an equilibrium for the economy,
 and that without further changes in preferences,
 technology,
 knowledge,
 all agents would be satisfied,
 and there would be no pressures on prices to change.
 In practice,
 of course,
 all the exogenous determinants of the system are changing on a daily basis,
 and so there will never be a stationary vector of prices to 
\begin_inset Quotes bld
\end_inset

solve
\begin_inset Quotes brd
\end_inset

 the system of general equilibrium equations.
 Nevertheless,
 it would not be unreasonable to assume that agents in a general equilibrium system would be able to judge in which direction prices would need to change in order to resolve excesses of supply and demand in specific markets.
 This indeed is the central heuristic of neoclassical economics and monetary explanations of inflation.
 As was discussed previously,
 the implicit theory of inflation is then derived by appealing to the 
\begin_inset Quotes bld
\end_inset

classical dichotomy
\begin_inset Quotes brd
\end_inset

 is to explain the 
\emph on
level
\emph default
 of prices (and thus the rate of inflation) as being a purely monetary phenomenon.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
A behavioural theory of inflation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
There are a number of problems with this framework for the determination of relative prices,
 however.
 The first is that economic agents (people and enterprises) simply accept the gains and losses implied by changes in relative prices.
 While gains will of course be accepted,
 losses are likely to be strongly resisted.
 The second problem is that it assumes that agents
\begin_inset Quotes brd
\end_inset

 behaviour is governed by the rational maximisation of utility.
 Finally,
 it is assumed that they have the cognitive ability to perform such a maximisation.
 Behavioural economics literature 
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
For example,
 see 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
key "Simon55,simon1956,kahneman1979,kahneman2002,kahneman2003a,thaler2016,thaler2018"
pretextlist "Simon55	simon1956"
posttextlist "Simon55	simon1956"
literal "false"

\end_inset

 and many others.
\end_layout

\end_inset

 has clearly demonstrated that these three axioms of behaviour do not represent the way individuals make choices and cannot therefore form a satisfactory basis for macroeconomic theory.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Rather than viewing inflation as a monetary phenomenon it is more useful to view it as a conflict over the allocation of resources.
 In this view there will be a number of competing factors which determine the levels of inflationary pressure in the economy.
 On the one hand increasing productivity and labour force participation will tend to decrease inflationary pressures (by making more resources available for distribution),
 while a deterioration (improvement) in the terms of trade will increase (decrease) inflationary pressures.
 Similarly,
 devaluation (revaluation) of the real exchange rate will increase (decrease) inflationary pressures.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Equally,
 excess aggregate demand allows agents in some sectors to increase their command over resources,
 by raising relevant prices (including wages).
 However,
 whether they will do so and whether this will result in sustained inflation will depend of a set of factors to be discussed below.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The question then is:
 if agents are not (and cannot be) mechanically optimising resources,
 how are prices and inflation determined.
 To say that agents are not rational optimisers,
 setting marginal productivity and marginal desire for leisure equal to prices and wages,
 does not mean that price setting for many goods and services will not respond to the forces of 
\begin_inset Quotes bld
\end_inset

supply and demand
\begin_inset Quotes brd
\end_inset

.
 Rather the argument is that since,
 in many cases,
 the marginal calculations are impossible,
 the setting of prices and wages will rely substantially on convention and historically established notions of fairness.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this view a sustained period of low inflation will imply that there is a consensus among those individuals and institutions with the power to change or challenge existing relative prices,
 that the existing prices are in some sense fair or normal.
 This does not necessarily mean that most individuals in a low inflationary economy believe that the distribution of income resulting from the prevailing relative prices and wages is fair,
 but rather that those who perceive it to be unfair do not have the power to change prices or wages in their favour.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
For example,
 the absence of inflation during peaceful periods of the 19
\begin_inset script superscript

\begin_layout Plain Layout
th
\end_layout

\end_inset

 century in western Europe and the United States,
 clearly did not mean that the majority of the population saw the distribution of income as fair.
 Indeed it was the perceived unfairness that led to social movements to develop institutions (including trade unions,
 labour protection legislation and social insurance) to and try and change the distribution of resources in society (through rising wages,
 and taxation and social transfers).
 
\end_layout

\end_inset

 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The question then is what causes inflation once a stable low inflation has been established.
 Historically,
 prior to the industrial revolution,
 the two main causes of inflation were war and crop failure.
 War implied the reduction of productive capacity (by taking people out of civilian occupations,
 particularly in agriculture,
 and the physical destruction of land and other resources due to the war).
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
