#LyX 2.4 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 620
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass book
\begin_preamble
% dont number subsections
%sets no indents use \noindent for ad hoc indentation RC
\usepackage{tikz}
\usepackage{pgfplots}
\pgfplotsset{compat=1.18}

\usepackage{lipsum}%% dummy text package

\usepackage{sectsty}% for centering section titles
%\sectionfont{\centering}  % for centering section titles

\parskip=6pt %sets space between paragraphs

\usepackage{dcolumn}
\usepackage{booktabs}%\usepackage{tabulary}

\usepackage[authordate]{biblatex-chicago}
\bibliography{biblio/biblio} 

\graphicspath{{figures/}} % all figures stored in subdirectory
\usepackage[hang,flushmargin]{footmisc}%stops indents on footnotes Must be placed after {biblatex-chicago} to work

\renewcommand{\labelenumi}{(\alph{enumi})} %sets default list to (a) (b) (c)

%=====================================================================
\end_preamble
\options A4
\use_default_options false
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\language british
\language_package none
\inputencoding utf8
\fontencoding default
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 1
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\float_placement class
\float_alignment class
\paperfontsize 11
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 0
\use_package cancel 0
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 0
\use_package mathtools 0
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 0
\use_package stmaryrd 0
\use_package undertilde 0
\cite_engine biblatex
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblio_style plain
\biblatex_bibstyle chicago-authordate
\biblatex_citestyle chicago-authordate
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 0
\use_formatted_ref 0
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\branch Hidden_notes
\selected 0
\filename_suffix 0
\color background background
\end_branch
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 2.5cm
\topmargin 2.5cm
\rightmargin 2.5cm
\bottommargin 2.5cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip halfline
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style british
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tablestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content true
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
A behavioural approach to monetary policy
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Monetary Policy
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset label
LatexCommand label
name "monetarypolicy"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Monetary policy (largely through interest rate movements) may have affects on private consumption and investment decisions.
 However,
 once one removes the axiom of the maximisation of intertemporal utility as the dominant motivation for consumers,
 the scope for interest rates to affect private consumption decisions is considerably diminished.
 This is consistent with the empirical literature [cite sources] on the relatively low elasticity of consumption to interest rates.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Whether interest rates will affect private consumption significantly will depend very much on the institutional framework for consumption.
 In an economy in which a large part of the population buys houses on mortgages (particularly variable rate mortgages),
 there is no doubt that interest rates will affect income and consumption,
 both through the purchase of new housing (which also drives a significant part of the consumer durable market) and through the 
\emph on
income and wealth
\emph default
 effects on existing borrowers,
 where a rise in the interest rate will act as a tax on the borrower’s income and (over time) reduce the perceived value of assets (such as property).
 However,
 those parts of the population who are credit constrained (particularly the ‘poor’,
 as described above) or holders of financial assets (largely the ‘rich’ from above) will,
 in the former case,
 be insensitive to interest rate changes,
 and in the latter,
 have a positive income effect for a rise in the interest rate.
 Thus the social and institutional structure will determine if there is any sensitivity of consumption to interest rate movements.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The relationship of physical investment to interest rates is also unlikely to be a smooth monotonic function.
 In the paradigm of the macroeconomic textbooks entrepreneurs have the choice of investing in numerous projects with a well defined rate of return (possibly with a well defined variance around the expected rate of return).
 If the expected rate of return exceeds the interest rate (and the entrepreneur can secure the necessary capital - from borrowing,
 equity or own resources) the investment is likely to take place.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Hence,
 in this approach a fall in the (real) rate of interest will tend to raise the volume of investment,
 while a rise will diminish the volume of investment.
 There is little doubt that very high real rates of interest are effective in curtailing investment,
 and indeed severe monetary contractions can very quickly reduce investment levels,
 by raising enormously the risk of investment,
 in a moment when demand for final output is likely to fall.
 While the comparison of the relative returns on financial assets and physical investment may have some effect,
 there is little doubt that the principal effect of raising interest rates is to reduce the expected return of investment,
 through expected falls in aggregate demand.
 As discussed in section xxxx the likelihood of a very high variance of the rate of return on investment (particularly in countries with weak institutional structures),
 is also likely to reduce the elasticity of investment to the rate of interest.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Low rates of interest,
 however,
 may not have symmetric effects.
 While they may reduce slightly the costs of investment,
 they will not increase expected returns by as much as high rates depress expected returns.
 The experience of ultra-low interest rates since 2008 is perhaps the clearest illustration of this point.
 There has not been an extraordinary investment boom by historical standards.
 Nor have zero real or nominal rates suddenly made previously unviable investments viable,
 precisely because of the uncertainty over returns.
 What low interest rates 
\emph on
have
\emph default
 done is to raise asset prices,
 (property,
 shares,
 cryptocurrency,
 etc.),
 often purchased using cheap credit to leverage returns,
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
This is the essence of Minsky’s financial Instability Hypothesis,
 
\begin_inset ERT
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
textcite{Minsky77,Minsky86}
\end_layout

\end_inset

 which argues that financial crises are not aberrations or due to policy errors,
 but rather inherent characteristics of capitalist economies with financial markets.
\end_layout

\end_inset

 as wealth holders look for alternative (and often more risky) assets to produce a return,
 as discussed in section xxxx.
 Over time the rise in asset prices may also contribute to raising consumption through wealth effects,
 at the expense of increasing the risks of reversing monetary policy,
 as evidenced by the economic crises of 2008 and 2022.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
All these considerations suggest that private expenditure on consumption and investment may be affected by monetary policy in an uncertain and unpredictable manner.
 The effects of monetary policy will depend upon changing views about the future,
 of both consumers and investors.
 They are unlikely to be linear or even monotonic.
 In these circumstances,
 while it may be possible to identify at a specific moment in time an interest rate which will be consistent with full employment of resources at a low inflation rate,
 there will be nothing natural or stable about this interest rate,
 and indeed,
 in many circumstances it may not exist.
 There is no reason that a natural interest rate should exist once we dispense with the idea that interest rates in some sense reflect a trade-off between present and future consumption for consumers engaged in an exercise of intertemporal utility maximisation,
 or that it is related to the real (unknowable) return to physical capital.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
