Allsopp, Christopher, and David Vines. ‘Monetary and Fiscal Policy in the Great Moderation and the Great Recession’. *Oxford Review of Economic Policy* 31, no. 2 (2015): 134–67.

#inflation #monetary_policy #stock_flow #fiscal #macro 

Annotations directly from article 19 Sept 2024

Economic policy-makers had much to be proud of during the Great Moderation when the global economy was effectively managed. Monetary policy controlled inflation and stabilized the economy. Fiscal policy was not used for these purposes. It was directed towards the longer-term concerns of fiscal sustainability and was focused on the control of budget deficits and the stabilization of government debt. We call this arrangement the New Consensus Assignment (or NCA). The NCA was widely understood. (page 135)

This all changed with the onset of the global financial crisis (GFC) in 2007 and
the subsequent Great Recession. The present paper puts forward an extremely simple story as to why things changed. Once interest rates reached their zero bound, monetary policy could no longer be used to stabilize the economy. But the continued use of fiscal policy to carry out the tasks assigned to it by the NCA - controlling budget deficits and stabilising government debt - meant that nobody was stabilizing the economy. It is hardly surprising that private-sector confidence in the efficacy of macroeconomic policy was greatly damaged and that, in most countries, private expenditure, including private investment, has been slow to recover. (page 135)

Our overall point is that a macroeconomic policy regime will work well if, and only if:
(i) it is clear which policy-maker is assigned which objective;
(ii) the objectives are achievable; and
(iii) the private sector believes that the objectives will be achieved.
This was the case during the Golden Age after the Second World War, and it became true again during the Great Moderation. But it was not true after 1971, when the Bretton Woods system collapsed, until around 1990; and it is not true now. We argue that it could become true again only if the role accorded to fiscal policy is greatly altered.

During the Golden Age, there was a broad consensus about the objectives of macroeconomic policy-making - full employment without inflation or balance-of-payments difficulties - and a clear assignment of policy instruments to the pursuit of these objectives. This assignment had three components (Swan, 1960). First, Keynesian demand-management policy had the objective of full employment; fiscal policy was the instrument of choice. Second, inflation was low. But, as and when necessary, inflation was controlled by prices-and-incomes policies (Fellner et al. ,1961). Third, the exchange rate was assigned to the preservation of external balance: the international monetary system established at Bretton Woods required a country's exchange rate to be  devalued as and when the country experienced a sustained current account deficit. This assignment of instruments to targets came about primarily for political economy reasons, rather than because instruments were being assigned to the targets over which they had a comparative advantage.(page 137)

*Monetary policy as the instrument of demand management*
Second, monetary policy became the primary instrument of demand management rather than fiscal policy, as had previously been the case... One reason for this change is that fiscal policy is subject to time lags, both in decision-making and in implementation. Another reason is that monetary policy can be delegated to an independent central bank, free of political influence. (page 138)

Friedman proposed targeting the money supply as a way of controlling inflation. Such (intermediate) targets were introduced in Britain in the mid-1970s, and (briefly) in the US in the early 1980s. Targets for broad money (£M3) were the defining feature of the Medium Term Financial Strategy (MTFS) in the UK, introduced by the Thatcher government in 1980. (See Allsopp (1985), in the first issue of this journal, for a critique of the framework adopted in the UK.) The fashion for intermediate monetary targets was short lived. Not only did they lead to high unemployment - perhaps an inevitable consequence of disinflationary policies - but the targets themselves were unmanageable: the demand for money is volatile and the supply of money
cannot be controlled. (page 139)

And central banks have also moved away from Friedman by using the interest rate as the policy instrument, rather than by trying to control the money supply. This move to the use of the interest rate as the policy instrument has had the effect of making the LM curve in the IS/LM system extremely misleading. (page 139)

But the Lucas critique is not an anti-interventionist idea. Activist policy regimes can work well if they are both feasible and believed in. This was true in the Golden Age and in the Great Moderation.22 But it has not been true in the Great Recession. It needs to become true again. (page 140)

By the early 1990s, inflation targeting had emerged: to be carried out by monetary policy, through active use of the interest rate as policy instrument. This regime was particularly simple. The active management of the economy is assigned to a single institution, the central bank, using a single instrument, the interest rate.... This simplicity was necessary for the emergence of what we call the NCA of policy instruments to policy targets. But it was not sufficient. It was also necessary to pin down the role of fiscal policy...  The role found for fiscal policy was, instead, that it be used as the instrument for ensuring fiscal discipline - i.e. for targeting public-sector deficits and debt - in the knowledge that this would influence the interest rate which emerged. The necessary movements in the fiscal position were allowed to be gradual. In particular, fiscal policy came to allow the automatic stabilizers to operate over the economic cycle. (page 141)

We can describe the workings of an inflation-targeting regime using a simple model... There are three relationships within this model. First, output is demand-determined, as in the new-Keynesian tradition; an IS curve shows aggregate demand as depending on the real interest rate. Second, inflation is determined by a Phillips curve, showing inflation as equal to last period's inflation plus a coefficient times the output gap (i.e. the gap between output and its full-employment level). This form of Phillips curve is often described as 'accelerationisť: the rate of change of inflation is influenced by the level of output. Third, the real interest rate is determined by a simple reaction function which shows that the real interest rate is raised when inflation increases. There are just three endogenous variables: output, inflation, and the real interest rate.
This overall set-up is 'macroeconomics without the LM curve' (Romer, 2000); the kind of macroeconomics that we said above became necessary, once it was recognized that the instrument of policy was the interest rate and not some sort of money supply. This kind of macroeconomics has also become known as 'Taylor-rule macroeconomics'. It produces a stable macroeconomic system providing that policy adopts the 'Taylor principle': when inflation rises, the nominal interest rate must be increased by more than any increase in the inflation rate, so that the real interest rate rises, and vice versa. (page 143)

With a Taylor rule that appropriately targets inflation, and responds to changes in demand, not only will inflation home in on target inflation after an inflation shock, but the output gap will also converge to zero.36 This two-for-one property, described colourfully by Blanchard and Gali (2005) as a 'divine coincidence', depends on the accelerationist nature of the Phillips curve; inflation can only be on
target, and unchanging, if output is equal to its natural rate. (page 144)

The knowledge that monetary policy-makers would competently stabilize demand and output around their full employment levels - i.e. the divine coincidence - led to aggregate demand becoming, at least in part, forward-looking and self-stabilizing. In effect, good policy had the effect of stabilizing the components of private-sector demand in the IS curve. (page 144)

At any point in time, a looser (or tighter) fiscal policy will have an effect on aggregate demand and lead to a higher (or lower) interest rate, according to the interest rate reaction function. Bean (1998) used a model with this feature to argue that the fiscal authority in effect becomes a 'Stackelberg leader': the Treasury will, he said, 'internalize' the monetary authority's (predictable and rule-like) reaction function whenever it acts. Bean was concerned to show that such a set-up eliminates any temptation for the fiscal authorities to engineer an inflationary boom - for example, before an election. His idea had striking political economy implications. It meant that, as long as monetary policy is being made in a way which ensures an absence of inflation bias, there is no need for any institution, or rule, to prevent inflation bias on the part of the fiscal authorities. Even if the fiscal authorities have a preference for a level of output above the full employment level - perhaps desiring to help an incumbent government win an election - they will merely obtain higher interest rates if they attempt to pursue this excessive level of output - not a rewarding outcome. They are thus likely to discipline their own behaviour so as not to over-expand demand, even if they would prefer to do this. (page 145)

{Debt constraint emerges from this system as higher debt implies greater private sector wealth and therefore stimulates private-sector demand - thus pressing interest rates up - RC synopsis} (page 146)

The most important reason, however, why government debt dynamics did not appear to cause trouble, was the nature of Great Moderation itself. Fluctuations in demand, and in inflation, were on the whole small, and contained by monetary policy. Budget deficits and public debt fluctuated, especially as most governments took the view that the 'automatic stabilizers' should be allowed to operate 'over the cycle'. But the resulting variations in budgetary positions were not large enough to really threaten the consensus. Whenever it became necessary to stabilize public debt, that action led to a reduction in interest rates, and anticipations of fiscal consolidation would lead the private sector to anticipate lower interest rates. (page 147)

Our analysis shows that these rules need to be amended and developed. In particular once a negative shock is large enough to ensure that the zero bound for interest rates is reached, and monetary policy ceases to be able to stabilize the economy, it must become the task of fiscal policy to carry out such stabilization as best it can. Essentially, fiscal policy needs to take over the role previously played by monetary policy in the Great Moderation, and to be seen to be doing so.

We therefore propose a 'split' fiscal policy reaction function which recognizes this need. Such a reaction function would allow - and, indeed, require - fiscal policy to be guided by the rules of sustainability and good housekeeping in normal times when interest rates are above their zero bound, and an interest rate reaction function is capable of stabilizing the economy. But it would also allow - and, indeed require - that at the zero bound, fiscal policy would play an active role in stimulating demand, so as to steer the economy back towards the full employment of resources (page 149)


{some discretionary fiscal expansion after GFC in 2009 - but insufficient - RC} (page 152)

We have recounted this potted history to bring out one important point. Fiscal and monetary policy reactions, as the recession developed, were, initially, coherent from the standpoint of the NCA. And they worked; disaster was avoided. But as recovery developed, fiscal practices inherited from the NCA - a concentration on fiscal sustainability and the pursuit of good housekeeping - were put back in place. This was done, even though there was no longer any monetary policy in place of a kind which would help the economy to recover. G-20 Communiques presented the resulting fiscal consolidation as a 'sustainable and balanced' policy, even though there was no policy in place to ensure that the recovery would be 'strong' (IMF, 2015a; Vines, 2015a, b).
Why did this happen? It was claimed that, unless consolidation began, dire things would happen - e.g. a sell-off in the world bond markets and a take-off in inflation. Such predictions have spectacularly failed to materialize. To the extent that the predictions were based on some underlying model - whatever it was - that model has been refuted by the experience of the Great Recession. We now use our model to give a very simple account of what actually did happen. (page 153)

The reader is reminded that our model consists of five relationships: the IS curve, the Phillips curve, the interest rate reaction function, the government budget constraint, and the fiscal policy reaction function. It is straightforward to apply this model to the period which has followed the onset of the Great Recession. During this period, inflation has mostly been low and stable - after an initial blip caused by the still-high level of commodity prices - and it is still below target in many countries. So we turn off the Phillips curve. Second, with interest rates at the lower bound, we turn off the interest rate policy reaction function. But the government budget constraint remains in place. And the nature of the fiscal policy reaction function forms the centrepiece of our discussion. We are left with a simple set-up with effectively just two components. First, we have a rudimentary fix-price Keynesian model. Second, there is a flow-stock-flow relationship between government deficits, government debt, and private sector expenditure. Roughly speaking, aggregate demand (or the output gap) is influenced by government expenditure and taxes, and the government budget deficit feeds into the stock of government debt, changes in which (gradually) cause changes in private-sector wealth and thus in aggregate demand. (pages 153-154)

In this 'base case' or 'thought experiment', the fiscal rule is simply that the automatic stabilizers are allowed to operate. (Government expenditure is given throughout at its initial level.) Starting from the lower turning point, with recession and a large budget deficit, the initial situation is one where government debt is rising rapidly. But the good news is that the deficit has offset a similar amount of private-sector 'deleveraging' - that is, on average, the private sector has paid off debts or accumulated (net) assets to an extent indicated by the private-sector surplus. To make the example concrete, if the deficit in the first year were 10 per cent of GDP, then by the end of the year, the 'demand for wealth as such' shock has been satisfied by that amount. The effects are cumulative. A 10 per cent budget deficit for 2 years would provide wealth for the private sector equal to 20 per cent of GDP; for 3 years, it would be 30 percent, and so on. In fact, as the deficits cumulate, the economy should recover. Our simple model suggests that the economy will *fully* recover. And, with recovery, the induced government deficits should disappear. If the desired increase in wealth by the private sector was 40 per cent of GDP, then the system should home in on a new stock-and-flow equilibrium, with the original level of income and output and government debt higher by 40 per cent of GDP. If the initial shock to the demand for wealth is 'permanent' and unchanging through time - a big if - then the cumulation of the induced deficits equals the initial shock of the excess demand for wealth. This is a story where induced
fiscal deficits stabilize the economy and, over time, gradually offset the initial stock disequilibrium. 
The big point to make is that even this modest fiscal policy reaction function (essentially the fiscal authorities sit on their hands and wait for recovery) *requires* the authorities to tolerate the induced government deficits.(pages 155-156)

Finally we can examine the effects of a return to good fiscal housekeeping, i.e. the policies of austerity which have been imposed since 2010. We can speculate that, had governments tried hard from the beginning to avoid public deficits (overriding the stabilizers by a policy of cutting expenditures or raising taxes), then the situation would have been very much worse (see Eichengreen and O'Rourke, 2010, 2012). Indeed, extreme austerity (i.e. a policy of overriding the automatic stabilizers) might well have led to downward instability. (page157)

The danger with half-hearted austerity of this kind is that it simply slows the adjustment path. Such a policy is, of course, highly damaging. But there is an additional argument. The best policy, from the point of view of the fiscal authorities seeking to limit deficits and debt, may be fiscal activism and a large initial deficit, to the extent possible. Such a policy would speed a return to higher activity and growth, and should encourage an earlier return of private-sector investment to its more normal levels. That would mean that it would be possible to begin fiscal consolidation that much sooner. And that the amount of consolidation required would be that much lower. (page 157)

{QE relatively small effects as main channel is through the exchange rate - but if all countries do so together effects are limited - RC} (page 159)



Helicopter money amounts to a budget deficit financed by central bank money. Central banks have, so far, avoided explicit use of this policy. Under present conditions, at the ZLB, there is rather little difference between a helicopter money drop, and a so-called 'bond rain', except that one appears to be monetary and the other fiscal. But this difference is illusory. In the former case, the private sector ends up with more money, and in the latter with more bonds and treasury bills. But at the zero bound there is very little difference between these two things. Either would satisfy a 'demand for wealth as such'.A call for 'helicopter money', or for a bond rain, is essentially a call for fiscal policy to be more relaxed (or less 'austere') so as to supply more of the wealth - in the form of money or bonds - which the private sector wants, rather than something which is in some way an alternative policy. (page 159)


A helicopter drop of money would be a much easier way of getting out of a deflationary situation than requiring price and wage falls. But this, too, is just another argument that more public-sector assets should be supplied to the private sector, by running fiscal deficits. (page 160)

The 'split' fiscal policy reaction function which we are advocating would be demanding to operate, in three ways. First, at times when fiscal policy needs to play an active stabilization role, new competences would be required within the Ministries of Finance. During the Great Moderation, fiscal authorities delegated stabilization and inflation control, together with the institutional counterparts such as forecasting, modelling, and analysis that are needed to participate in the active management of the economy, to the monetary authorities. By contrast, if our proposals were to be adopted, the fiscal authorities would need that capacity in times like the present. Alternatively, support and capacity may need to be provided by the central bank, or by other institutional arrangements, such as fiscal policy councils or committees (see, for example, Wypłosz (2002) and, for a survey of existing institutions, Calmfors and Wren-Lewis (2011)). Second, guidance will need to be provided on when and where the split should operate, and what the 'changeover rules' should be, when such a role for fiscal policy comes to an end and the baton for macroeconomic stabilization is passed back to the monetary authorities. And third, periods in which fiscal policy acts in this way must not damage the stabilization of public debt that fiscal policy is able to bring about in a periods like the Great Moderation - including when such a period arrives again in the future. In such periods fiscal authorities must again be able to attend to fiscal sustainability, and to the management of public debt. (page 162)

### Biblio to check
Allsopp, C. J., and Vines, D. (2000), The Assessment: Macroeconomic Policy, *Oxford Review of Economic Policy*, 16(4), 1-32.
- (2005), 'The Macroeconomic Role of Fiscal Policy',
485-50

